Improve Interoperability LIPs (#187)
LiskHQ/lips: proposals/lip-0053.md

    validatorKeys = [validator.blsKey for validator in validators(partnerchainID).activeValidators]
    validatorWeights = [validator.bftWeight for validator in validators(partnerchainID).activeValidators]
    if not verifyAggregateCertificateSignature(

>         validators(partnerchainID).activeValidators,

Author: it looks fine to me: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0061.md#verifyaggregatecertificatesignature

>         validators(partnerchainID).activeValidators,

Reviewer: ah, I was checking only on this branch and not on main.

        raise Exception("Certificate must be non-empty if validators have been updated.")

    partnerchainID = ccu.params.sendingChainID
    newBLSKeys = ccu.params.newBLSKeys

>     # Validator keys must be in lexicographic order.

Author: it's to avoid having transaction malleability, where two distinct transactions have exactly the same processing

>     # Validator keys must be in lexicographic order.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure I understand, but since this is a minor point, we can leave it as is and you can explain me live what exactly you mean.

    if not all(newBLSKeys[i] < newBLSKeys[i + 1] for i in range(len(newBLSKeys) - 1)):
        raise Exception("New validator keys are not in lexicographic order.")

    currentBLSKeys = [v.blsKey for v in validators(partnerchainID).activeValidators]
    allBLSKeys = sorted(currentBLSKeys + newBLSKeys)
    # All validator keys must be distinct.
    if len(allBLSKeys) != len(set(allBLSKeys)):
        raise Exception("Duplicate BLS keys.")

    bftUpdateBitmap = ccu.params.bftUpdateBitmap
    # The length of the BFT update bitmap should equal the ceiling of the length of the keys list divided by 8.
    if len(bftUpdateBitmap) != (len(allBLSKeys) + 7) // 8:
        raise Exception("BFT update bitmap length is not equal to the ceiling of the length of the keys list divided by 8.")

    # The number of 1s in the bitmap must equal the number of new BFT weights.
    newBFTWeights = ccu.params.newBFTWeights

>     if int.from_bytes(bftUpdateBitmap, 'big').count("1") != len(newBFTWeights):

Author: yes, I forgot the bin :)

                raise Exception("New validators must have a positive BFT weight.")

    # Update validator list.
    newActiveValidators = calculateNewActiveValidators(validators(partnerchainID).activeValidators, newBLSKeys, newBFTWeights, bftUpdateBitmap)
    # newActiveValidators must have at least 1 element and at most MAX_NUM_VALIDATORS elements.
    if len(newActiveValidators) < 1 or len(newActiveValidators) > MAX_NUM_VALIDATORS:
        raise Exception(f"Invalid validators array. It must have at least 1 element and at most {MAX_NUM_VALIDATORS} elements.")
        
    certificateThreshold = ccu.params.certificateThreshold
    # computeValidatorsHash is defined in LIP 0058.
    certificate = decode(certificateSchema, ccu.params.certificate)
    if certificate.validatorsHash == computeValidatorsHash(newActiveValidators, certificateThreshold):
        raise Exception("Validators hash does not match.")
```

#### calculateNewActiveValidators

```python
def calculateNewActiveValidators(activeValidators: list[ActiveValidator], newBLSKeys: list[PublicKeyBLS], newBFTWeights: list[uint64], bftUpdateBitmap: bytes) -> list[ActiveValidator]:

>     currentBLSKeys = [v.blsKey for v in activeValidators]

Reviewer 2: I still think this is never used in this function.

    if len(newActiveValidators) < 1 or len(newActiveValidators) > MAX_NUM_VALIDATORS:
        raise Exception(f"Invalid validators array. It must have at least 1 element and at most {MAX_NUM_VALIDATORS} elements.")
        
    certificateThreshold = ccu.params.certificateThreshold
    # computeValidatorsHash is defined in LIP 0058.
    certificate = decode(certificateSchema, ccu.params.certificate)
    if certificate.validatorsHash != computeValidatorsHash(newActiveValidators, certificateThreshold):
        raise Exception("Validators hash does not match.")
```

#### calculateNewActiveValidators

```python
def calculateNewActiveValidators(activeValidators: list[ActiveValidator], blsKeysUpdate: list[PublicKeyBLS], bftWeightsUpdate: list[uint64], bftWeightsUpdateBitmap: bytes) -> list[ActiveValidator]:
    currentBLSKeys = [v.blsKey for v in activeValidators]
    newValidators = [{"blsKey": blsKey, "bftWeight": 0} for blsKey in blsKeysUpdate]
    newActiveValidators = sorted(activeValidators + newValidators, key = lambda v: v.blsKey)

    # Update BFT weights.
    intBitmap = int.from_bytes(bftWeightsUpdateBitmap, 'big')

>     bitmapSize = len(bftWeightsUpdateBitmap)

Reviewer 2: This is also not needed in this function.

>     # Invert bftWeightsUpdate to be able to poop from the end.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # Revert bftWeightsUpdate to be able to pop from the end.
```

>     bftWeightsUpdate = bftWeightsUpdate[::-1]

Reviewer 2: I would just use .reverse() for clarity (and should be more efficient anyways)

    newInboxRoot = calculateRootFromRightWitness(inboxTree.size, inboxTree.appendPath, ccu.params.inboxUpdate.messageWitnessHashes)

    # Verification for non-empty certificates.
    outboxRootWitness = ccu.params.inboxUpdate.outboxRootWitness
    if len(ccu.params.certificate) > 0:
        if outboxRootWitness is empty:

>             raise Exception("If a certificate is present, the outbox root witness must be non-empty to authenticate the new partnerChainOutboxRoot.")

Reviewer 2: I would remove the "if a certificate is present" from the sentence, because it's confusing.

In general, you might have a certificate and an empty outboxRootWitness, in case inbox update is empty. But here this function is called only when inbox update is non-empty. To avoid confusion, I would just say, "the outbox root must be non-empty to .... "

    # Verification for empty certificates.
    else:
        if len(outboxRootWitness) > 0:

>             raise Exception("The oitbox root witness can be non-empty only if the certificate is non-empty.")

Reviewer: oitbox --> outbox

    "required": [
        "sendingChainID",
        "certificate",

>         "newBLSKeys",

Reviewer 2: After fixing all other comments, it might be worth considering merging those 3 params into one, with name `activeValidatorsUpdate` as before and make them part of this object.

Author: done.

```python
def verify(ccu: Transaction) -> None:
    certificateBytes = ccu.params.certificate
    if len(certificateBytes) == 0 and ccu.params.inboxUpdate is empty: # An empty object has all properties set to their default values.
        raise Exception("A cross-chain update must contain a non-empty certificate and/or a non-empty inbox update.")

    if not isLive(ccu.params.sendingChainID):
        raise Exception("The sending chain is not live.")
    
    if chainAccount(ccu.params.sendingChainID).status == CHAIN_STATUS_REGISTERED and len(certificateBytes) == 0:

>         raise Exception("The first CCU must contain a non-empty certificate.")

Reviewer: This was already wrong before this commit but could be fixed now: `ccu` must not be the first CCU even the condition `if chainAccount(ccu.params.sendingChainID).status == CHAIN_STATUS_REGISTERED` is fulfilled. So the text should be "CCUs from chains with status CHAIN_STATUS_REGISTERED must have non-empty certificates."

Author: fixed

        # This function never raises an error.
        elif ccm.receivingChainID != CHAIN_ID_MAINCHAIN:
            forward(ccu, ccm)
        # We append at the very end. This implies that if the message leads to a chain termination,
        # it is still possible to recover it (because the channel terminated message
        # would refer to an inbox where the message has not been appended yet).
        appendToInboxTree(ccu.params.sendingChainID, ccmBytes)
    # Update the context to indicate that now we stop the CCM processing.
    ctx.ccmProcessing = False

    # Update sidechain validators.
    validatorsUpdate = ccu.params.activeValidatorsUpdate
    if len(validatorsUpdate.blsKeysUpdate) > 0 or len(validatorsUpdate.bftWeightsUpdate) > 0 or validatorsUpdate.bftWeightsUpdateBitmap != EMPTY_BYTES or ccu.params.certificateThreshold != validators(ccu.params.sendingChainID).certificateThreshold:
        updateValidators(ccu)

    # Update last certificate.
    if len(ccu.params.certificate) > 0:
        updateCertificate(ccu)

    # Update partner chain outbox root.

>     if ccu.params.inboxUpdate is not empty: # An empty object has all properties set to their default values.

Reviewer 2: Minor comment: I think it would be good to change this condition to 

```suggestion
    if ccu.params.inboxUpdate is not empty and len(ccu.params.certificate) > 0:
```

The reason being that if certificate is empty, then the partner chain outbox root has been already updated earlier, so no need to re-calculate it. Same in line 713 for the sidechain CCU. I don't say the current is wrong, but adding this extra check avoids un-necessary computation and as far as I see it does not break any case.

Author: done

        updateCertificate(ccu)

    # Update partner chain outbox root.

>     # If no certificate is present, the partner chain outbox root would not change.

Reviewer 2: I think same modification should be done in line 716 for the sidechain CCU as well, right? 

Also, I would keep the old comment about empty objects.

        raise Exception("The first CCU must contain a non-empty certificate.")
    if len(certificateBytes) > 0:
        verifyCertificate(ccu)

>     if len(ccu.params.blsKeysUpdate) > 0 or len(ccu.params.bftWeightsUpdate) > 0 or ccu.params.bftWeightsUpdateBitmap != EMPTY_BYTES or ccu.params.certificateThreshold != validators(ccu.params.sendingChainID).certificateThreshold:

Reviewer 2: To be in sync with the updated CCU schema, we need to use `ccu.params.activeValidatorsUpdate.blsKeysUpdate` and  `ccu.params.activeValidatorsUpdate.bftWeightsUpdate` instead of  `ccu.params.blsKeysUpdate` and `ccu.params.bftWeightsUpdate`. (there are 3 places in the LIP where those variables appear).

### Computing the Validators Update

When posting a CCU transaction, the validators hash given in the certificate certifies the new set of validators of the sending chain. The CCU must therefore include the difference between the validators currently stored in the chain account and the validator set authenticated by the certificate. The BLS keys of new validators are contained in the `newBLSKeys` property, while the new BFT weights are contained in the `newBFTWeights` property. These properties can be obtained applying the functions given below.

```python
def getnewBLSKeys(currentValidators: list[ActiveValidator], newValidators: list[ActiveValidator]) -> list[PublicKeyBLS]:
    currentBLSKeys = [v.blsKey for v in currentValidators]

>     newBLSKeys = [validator.blsKey for validator in newValidators]

Author: sure, I will merge it into one line

    newBLSKeys = sorted([blsKey for blsKey in newBLSKeys if blsKey not in currentBLSKeys])
    return newBLSKeys
```

```python
def getnewBFTWeights(currentValidators: list[ActiveValidator], newValidators: list[ActiveValidator]) -> list[uint64]:
    validatorsUpdate: list[ActiveValidator] = []
    for validator in newValidators:
        # We add the validator to the validatorsUpdate unless an entry with the same BLS key and BFT weight already exists in currentValidators.
        if validator not in currentValidators:
            validatorsUpdate.append(validator)

    for validator in currentValidators:
        # We add the validator to the validatorsUpdate (with 0 BFT weight) if the BLS key is not in the newValidators.

>         if validator.blsKey not in newBLSKeys:

Author: Didn't we already add those in the previous for cycle? As I explain in the comment "We add the validator to the validatorsUpdate unless an entry with the same BLS key and BFT weight already exists in currentValidators."

>         if validator.blsKey not in newBLSKeys:

Reviewer 2: The `newBLSKeys` is now correctly defined. My comment about the logic was wrong, so the comment can now be resolved.

            validatorsUpdate.append({'blsKey': validator.blsKey, 'bftWeight': 0})
    
    validatorsUpdate = sorted(validatorsUpdate, key=lambda v: v.blsKey)

    newBFTWeights = []
    for validator in validatorsUpdate:

>         newBFTWeights.append(validator.bftWeight)

Author: yes, it should be `pop(0)`

### Computing the Validators Update

When posting a CCU transaction, the validators hash given in the certificate certifies the new set of validators of the sending chain. The CCU must therefore include the difference between the validators currently stored in the chain account and the validator set authenticated by the certificate. The BLS keys of new validators are contained in the `blsKeysUpdate` property, while the new BFT weights are contained in the `bftWeightsUpdate` property. These properties can be obtained applying the function given below.

```python
def getActiveValidatorsUpdate(currentValidators: list[ActiveValidator], newValidators: list[ActiveValidator]) -> ActiveValidatorsUpdate:
    # Get the blsKeysUpdate.
    currentBLSKeys = [v.blsKey for v in currentValidators]
    newBLSKeys = [v.blsKey for v in newValidators]
    blsKeysUpdate = sorted([blsKey for blsKey in newBLSKeys if blsKey not in currentBLSKeys])

>     validatorsUpdate: list[ActiveValidator] = []

Reviewer: `validatorsUpdate = []` ?

Author: I wanted to be super specific with the type, maybe not necessary? the notation is not wrong

Reviewer: ok, we don't use anywhere else. But if you prefer to have it, it's fine.
